Crititcal Reflection Journal

# Introduction

Over the past five weeks there has been many opportunities to reflect on my personal and professional practises. Furthermore, during this time period I have the chance to study and reflect on stuff that I otherwise would not have considered, which has helped me grow professionally and as an individual. In this article we explore several situations that have occurred and how they have made me feel. Furthermore, I consider a number of solutions that could have improved these situations and how I plan to apply them in future. I begin by exploring some reason behind procrastination and briefly how I overcome the negative practice. Flowing that I have a look at inducing empathy in games then move on in improving my project planning and management. Lastly, I have a look an A/B testing situation where lots of lesions where learned, which had a positive outcome on me and the project that I was working on.


# Procrastination
When I returned to university I was really struggling to get back into the swing of things after a long summer of gaming and very little time spent on projects. I found that I was lacking inspiration and would fall back to procrastinating rather than doing any work. As a knock-on effect this filled me with self-doubt, dread and made me worry if I should even be doing a masters at all. I was concerned with the amount of written work that would be expective as this is something I generally struggle with being dyslexic. At the time it only seemed to contribute to the amount of procrastination I was undertaking. Generally, I don’t see myself as a procrastinator, therefor I decided it would be wise to gain a better understanding of procrastination and to see if there are any underlining factors that can contribute to the practise.

“Everyone procrastinates, but not everyone is a procrastinator.” -- Joseph Ferrari \cite{AMProcrastination}

There are a lot of theories for the reason behind procrastination, many simply believe it just "laziness" or poor time management, while others suggest that it can be caused by an underlining emotional issue \cite{ESProcrastination}. Meanwhile, in a TEDx talk by Nic Voge \cite{NVProcrastination}, he claims that procrastination is actually pretty predictable when you understand the dynamics of motivation. Nic believes it rooted in our self-worth rather than coping with difficult emotional or faulty time management. In addition, Nic talks about how it could be a form of self-protection, this way, if we get a bad result, it doesn’t mean we're not capable but rather we were too distracted to our best. This pretty much nailed it on the head for how I was feeling at the time.

“Procrastination isn’t shameful or a character flaw. Instead it’s rooted in a very human need: the need to feel competent and worthy” - Nic Voge \cite{NVProcrastination2}

Nic makes a few suggestions to break the cycle. We should be aware of what we’re doing and get familiar with out “greatest hits” of wasting time. For me, this is mindlessly scrolling through Reddit, YouTube and the likes. Furthermore, he claims we need to find a way to “tip the balance” from the "avoid" motives (reasons why not to do something) to the more positive "approach" motives (reasons to do something). Apparently, procrastination can simply be put down to fears overwhelming the "approach" motives. This was very relevant to how I was feeling at the time, I was worried that there will be too much written work, I’ll fall behind and it will end in failure. Nic suggests that it can help to look at the bigger picture, remind yourself of your personal goals, objectives or missions. If it’s still intimidating break it down into smaller tasks.

With that said, I decided to take Nic's advice, I later reflected on my personal mission and reasoned with myself all the reasons I can achieve a master’s degree. Furthermore, I set myself several challenges and goals to achieve over the next week or so. I didn’t achieve all of them, but it was enough to prove to myself that I can do it. Now my procrastination rate is almost non-existent now I’m back into the swing of things.

# Inducing Empathy in Games
In one of our workshops, we looked at rapid ideation methods and where tasked with creating a text-driven game based around 'Call and Response'. For this project we were put into groups of four and were asked to use a form of rapid ideation to come up with ideas. We decided to focus on mental health using relatable non-human characters. The idea was that the player would have to complete some activity in order to overcome a negative emotion, suggesting to the player that everything would work out in the end.

I was fully supportive of the idea as I struggled with my own mental health during the first two covid lockdowns. I personally feel that this gave us a chance to explore some of these emotions that many felt during that time. Therefore, giving us the perfect opportunity to induce empathy on the player. However, somewhere along the lines we lost the message that we were trying to get across which resulted in the project becoming a bit of a flop. 

In a later workshop we were given a piece to read, for our group we were given "Designing games to foster empathy" by J Belman et al \cite{GamesToFosterEmpath}. It was extremely relevant for the project that we were currently working on and has given me a number of considerations for a personal project I would like to work on in the future. The paper itself contained a wealth of information relating to many different areas of research into empathy. It follows by making a several suggestions on how to incorporate different aspects of empathy into games.

J Belman and M. Flanagan suggest that players are more likely to be empathetic if it is introduced from the offset of the game. However, if the attempt is ineffective it will result in most players playing the game “unempathetically”. Furthermore, they propose that players should be given specific recommendations in relation to the solution to the issues represented. They claim that this should be decided on a case-by-case basis, whether an iconic (i.e. an icon hovering over a non-playable character (NPC)) or true-to-life (i.e. accurate modelling of NPCs) representation is used. Continuing that, they suggest that short burst of emotional empathy works well if desired outcomes are in line with beliefs about themselves in relation to the world. 

I felt that if we had implemented some of the suggestions made by J Belman et all we would have had a much better chance of inducing empathy on the player. With that said, I’ve learned a lot from reading the paper, which has given me some new things to consider when designing games. The methods suggested will be feed through into future projects as empathy can play an important role in video games.  

# Project Management
During the 'Call and Response' assignment, we further failed to design and manager our project correctly. In the first couple of days, we discussed out ideas as a team which gave us a brief concept for the artifact that we would like to build. During these discussions we simply just jotted down some notes, went our separate ways and started to work on the game. At no point during our discussions did we decide to turn our notes into a concrete plan in the form of a game design document (GDD) nor did we use any tools to track our progress in the form of a scrum board \cite{Scrum}. This was not very agile \cite{Agile}of us.

In group projects I often avoid taking on the lead role especially if I’m not the idea holder. Furthermore, I am generally really slack when it comes to managing a scrum board and often ignore the GDD. Moreover, I find that it can be very daunting to fill a scrum board with tasks that are required to create a minimal viable product (MVP). This is because I believe its more flexible to work from a brief set of notes while we workout some of the unknows which might require changing. However, since we lost sight of our goals, I now regret that decision and wish I had urged for a GDD and scrum board. Furthermore, this made me feel like a failure and to be honest I was quite embarrassed to show the project to reset of the cohort.

This could have been avoided if we had a GDD. In an article by Danilo Marcio Lima de Carvalho et al \cite{GDD}, details a general overview of a GDD for short projects. They state it should include the very basics such as project name, genre, technologies and target audience. They continue by describing that an overview of the environment and high-level narrative and plot should be included along with how the gameplay should function. They further note that the document should be as concise as possible and include visual references to help the reader imagine the game. 

Secondly, had we planned our sprint and created a scrum board to manage our progress, we most likely would not have forgotten many points that needed implementing. Sprint planning is an important part of software development. The purpose of the event is to define what can be achieved in the time frame. Furthermore, when using user stories \cite{UserStories} it give a team a way to determine whether or not a task is complete. A typical user story consists of 'As a <type of user>, I want <a goal> so that <a reason>' which makes it fairly obvious when the task it complete (can that user type achieves that goal for that reason). However, as a programmer I often avoid user stories as I find there is a lot of overlap in tasks. With that said I now think that the benefits outweigh the negatives, especially when considering the entire team.

I told myself that on the next project if no one steps up to take on the role I would be straight in there, now I relies how important these documents are for group project. Upon starting the next project, I put a lot of emphasis on project management, to encourage the team to follow protocol. Once we had our idea and was happy with what we wanted to make it was the first thing we did before we created any assets for the game and that project turned out to be a huge success.

# A/B Testing

For our last project in the module, we were asked to come up with ideas relating to culture and society. Furthermore, we had to come up with something technical that we would like to create, then put all our ideas into a "pool of ideas" to then form teams from. I ended up joining another group, since they had a strong idea to create, a punk rock themed street fighter game \footnote{Street Fighter video game series: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Street_Fighter}, which uses Guitar Hero controllers \footnote{Guitar Hero vedio game series: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guitar_Hero} and it would be illustrated using pixel art.

During our initial planning sessions, we came up with two different controller schemes (CS), which would later be known as the "casual CS" and the "punk CS". The "casual CS" used the top button to jump, the next three buttons down are used to attack and the bottom button to crouch, while strum is used to move. On the other hand, the "punk CS" uses the top button to move forwards and the bottom button to move backwards, while you held one of the middle three button and strummed to active an attack, to jump or crouch to just strum up or down respectively. 

As a team we couldn’t come to an agreement on which scheme to use since there was a fair argument for both although we were leaning more toward to "casual CS". So we decided it would be best to put it the player and do some A/B testing \cite{AB1}\cite{AB2}, which is something I have never done before. Once it was implemented into the game, we managed to recruit around twenty people to play test the two controller schemes. The response we got from the play testing was not necessarily what we expected.

What we expected was, that most people would prefer the "casual CS" however what we found was that the more serious players and those with experience with Guitar Hero like the potential of the "punk CS". Furthermore, they also found it was satisfying to hold an attack button and strum to activate it. However, some players did fine some potential issues with the scheme such as, it’s very hard to preform jump, attack combos since its strum up to jump and you must strum again while holding an action button to active the attack. We also found that in general everyone liked how responsive attack where with the "casual CS" and all-in-all was preferred by the more casual players and those with less experience with Guitar Hero. Furthermore, we found that players with smaller hands found it difficult to switch between move buttons on the "punk CS" or the jump, crouch buttons on the "casual CS". 

At first, I found it was quite a lot of work to implement the two controller schemes. However, after the wealth of information we collected during the play test session I now understand how valuable A/B testing really is. It was a very uplifting and therefor pleasant experience, with lots of lessons learned. It confirmed that we are on to something with the "punk CS" and we will continue to develop the controller scheme in GAM703 along with doing more A/B testing.


# Conclusion
In this article I have explored several situations that I have learned from. To begin I explored the reason behind a case of procrastination that I was stuffing from, I found that some believe its linked to underline emotional issue. However, Nic Voge suggest otherwise and that it rooted in our self-worth which appeared to be in line with how I was feeling. I then investigated inducing empathy in games and learned that there are many things to consider when designing around empathy. These considerations will be bought forwards into future projects. I then explore methods and practises to improve my project planning and management, since a project that I worked on failed due to poor judgement in these areas. I learned the importance of a game design document and why we should plan our project to fit the time available. Lastly, I analyse some A/B testing scenarios, which made me realise that it is one of the most valuable things a developer can do to gain insight into there players. 

